---
title: Discrete Structures Lectures 8 & 9
author: Abhinav Menon
code: ma5.101
number: 8
---
*Note: Content of multiple lectures*

## Relations
A relation $R$ from a set $A$ to another set $B$ is defined as a subset of $A \times B$. When $B = A$, $R$ is said to be a relation *on* $A$.

### Properties of Relations
A relation $R$ on a set $A$ is said to be

1. **reflexive**, if $a \in A \Rightarrow (a,a) \in R$.
2. **symmetric**, if $(a,b) \in R \Rightarrow (b,a) \in R$.
3. **transitive**, if $(a,x) \in R \wedge (x,b) \in R \Rightarrow (a,b) \in R$ ($a$, $x$ and $b$ not necessarily distinct).
3. a **compatibility** relation, if it is reflexive and symmetric.
4. an **equivalence** relation, if it is reflexive, symmetric and transitive.

## Equivalence Relations
Informally, most equivalence relations can be connected to elements having some property in common.

Given an equivalence relation $R$ on a set $A$, the *equivalence class* of an arbitrary $a \in A$ (denoted by $[a]$, $cl(a)$ or $\bar{a}$) is defined as the set of all elements related to $a$ in $A$, *i.e.*, 
<div>$$[a] = \{x \in A | (x,a) \in R\}$$</div>

### Equivalence Classes
The set of all equivalence classes of $A$ with respect to $R$ form a *partition* of $A$. A partition of a set $A$ is a collection of disjoint subsets $A_{i}$ (called *parts*) of $A$ whose union is $A$, *i.e.*, mutually exclusive and exhaustive.

Also, given a partition $P = \{A_{1}, A_{2},...,A_{k}\}$ of $A$, an equivalence relation can be defined on A as 
<div>$$R = \{(x,y) \in A \times A | x,y \in  A_{i}\}$$</div>

Thus, defining an equivalence relation on a set is precisely the same as partitioning it, since the equivalence classes form a partition, and any partition gives rise to an equivalence relation.

### Counting Equivalence Relations
Since defining an equivalence relation is equivalent to partitioning a set, the number of equivalence relations on a set is equal to the possible number of partitions of it. The number of ways to partition a set of cardinality $n$ is called $B_{n}$. These numbers are called *Bell numbers*.

The number of ways to partition a set of cardinality $n$ into $r$ (unlabelled) parts is called $S(n,r)$. These numbers are called *Stirling numbers of the second kind*.

#### Stirling Numbers
In order to evaluate $S(n,r)$, we find a way to relate it to the previous Stirling numbers, *i.e.*, we identify a recursion.

Consider a set $A_{n} = \{x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n}\}$ that we wish to partition into $r$ parts.

We can say that $A_{n} = A_{n-1} \cup \{x_{n}\}$, where $A_{n-1} = \{x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n-1}\}$ Here, we identify two cases with respect to $x_{n}$:

**Case 1.** $x_{n}$ is in a partition by itself. Now, $A_{n-1}$ has to be partitioned into only $(r-1)$ parts – hence there are $S(n-1,r-1)$ ways for this case to happen.

**Case 2.** $x_{n}$ shares a partition with some other $x_{i} \in A_{n-1}$. Now, $A_{n-1}$ will have to be partitioned into $r$ parts, and $x_{n}$ can be added to any of them – hence there are $rS(n-1,r)$ ways for this case to happen.

Both these cases are mutually exclusive and the possibilities can therefore be directly added, giving us the required recursion, *i.e.*
<div>$$S(n,r) = S(n-1,r-1) + rS(n-1,r)$$</div>

The initial value $S(1,1)$ is simply the number of ways to leave a singleton set alone; hence $S(1,1) = 1$. Further, a set cannot have more parts than its cardinality (since all parts must be nonempty); hence $n < r \Rightarrow S(n,r) = 0$.

#### Bell Numbers
Since $B_{n}$ is simply the number of ways to partition $A_{n}$ into any number of parts, we obtain it by summing up the Stirling numbers, *i.e.*,
<div>$$B_{n} = \sum_{r = 1}^{n} S(n,r)$$</div>

Another recursion in terms of Bell numbers alone can be identified. Let $A_{i} = \{x_{1}, x_{2},...,x_{i} \}$ as above. Now consider $x_{n+1} \in A_{n+1}$. We will look at the number of elements in the part containing $x_{n+1}$ for an arbitrary partition of $A_{n+1}$.

Let $x_{n+1}$ be in a subset containing $k$ other elements for some partition. These $k$ elements have to be chosen from the $n$ elements of $A_{n}$, which can be done in $n \choose k$ ways. Now, the remaining $(n-k)$ elements need to be partitioned; this can be done in $B_{n-k}$ ways.

Since $k$ ranges from 0 to $n$, we obtain the following recursion:

<div>
$$
\begin{aligned}
B_{n+1} & = \sum_{k = 0}^{n} { {n} \choose {k} }{B_{n-k} } \\
		& = \sum_{k=0}^{n} { {n} \choose {n-k} }{B_{k} } \\
		& = \sum_{k=0}^{n} { {n} \choose {k} }{B_{k} }
\end{aligned}
$$
</div>


## Closures
Relations can be extended in order to have a certain property (reflexivity, symmetry or transitivity). This operation is called *closure*.

Let $P(R)$ indicate that $R$ has a certain property $P$. Then, the closure of $R$ with respect to $P$ is the set $R_{P}$, for which the following hold:

1. $P(R_{P})$.
2. $R \subseteq R_{P}$.
3. $R \subseteq R' \wedge P(R') \Rightarrow R_{P} \subseteq R'$, *i.e.*, $R_{P}$ is the smallest set satisfying (1) and (2).

The reflexive closure of a relation over a set $A$ is obtained by taking its union with the set $\Delta = \{(a,a)\, \vert \, a \in A\}$*i.e.*,
<div>$$r(R) = R \cup \Delta$$</div>

The symmetric closure of a relation is obtained by taking its union with its inverse, *i.e.*,
<div>$$s(R) = R \cup R^{-1}$$</div>

The transitive closure of a relation has no such simple representation. It is denoted by $t(R)$.

